### $S_n$ Representation Theory

- [x] #task grab info from my thesis on this ✅ 2024-02-22

%% #-🪴weedy %%
parent:: [[Fleeting MOC]]

This section describes the representation theory of the symmetric group. We assume the basics of finite group representation theory, as found in for instance the beginning of Sagan’s book [24, Chapter 1]. We only work over the complex numbers. In this case the representation theory of the symmetric group is split-semisimple. 

In addition, we sometimes refer to a representation as, equivalently, a module of the group algebra CSn [24, Definition 1.3.1]. The representation theory of the symmetric group is best described using the language of integer partitions. 

Definition 2.13. Fix a positive integer n. A partition of n is a nondecreasing sequence λ = (λ1, λ2, ··· , λn) ∈ Zn ≥0 such that n = ! i λi. 13 It is well known that the conjugacy class of permutations are described by cycle-type [24, Section 1.1]. Arranging the disjoint cycles in weakly decreasing order defines a partition of n. Hence partitions index the conjugacy classes of Sn and therefore count the isomorphism classes of irreducible Sn representations [24, Proposition 1.10.1]. Amazingly, this indexing is not merely a labeling. As we will see the combinatorics of partitions determine much of the structure of the representation theory. Definition 2.14. Let λ be a partition of n. The Young diagram [λ] is the array with λi boxes in row i (using matrix coordinates). We refer to [λ] as the shape of λ. Figure 2.3 shows an example of a Young diagram. [λ] = Figure 2.3: The Young diagram of λ = (4, 4, 3, 2, 2, 1). There exists a partial order on partitions defined λ ! µ if every partial sum λ1 + ··· + λk is at most the corresponding partial sum µ1 + ··· + µk. Heuristically λ " µ in dominance order if [µ] is shorter and wider than [λ]. 14 2.1.2.1 Permutation representations Fix λ a partition of n. A tableau T is a bijective filling of [λ] with the numbers {1, 2, ··· , n}. The tableau T λ is the tableau with the numbers inserted in increasing order left-to-right and top-to-bottom, for instance see Figure 2.4. T(3,2,2) = 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Figure 2.4: The tableau T(3,2,2). Sn acts on tableaux by permuting the entries, that is, if T is tableau and w ∈ Sn then w · T has entry w(i) in the box where T has i. Definition 2.15. A tableau T is row-standard if the entries in each row of T are increasing. T is standard if it is row-standard and the entries of each column are increasing. The set of standard tableaux is not stable under the action of Sn since for instance s3 · T(3,2,2) is not standard. However we can define a natural equivalence relation on tableaux so that Sn acts on the equivalence classes. Definition 2.16. Two tableaux are row-equivalent if they contain the same row entries. Row equivalence defines an equivalence relation. The row-standard tableaux 15 form a set of representatives for the row-equivalence classes. The action of Sn on tableaux descends to a well-defined action on the set of equivalence classes. Definition 2.17. The permutation representation Mλ is the C-vector space with basis indexed by the row-equivalence classes of tableaux with CSn-module structure defined by the action of Sn on the row-equivalence classes. Example 2.18. Examples of permutation representations Mλ [24, Section 2.1]. 1. If λ = (n) then the only row standard tableaux is T(n) then M(n) = *[T(n) ]+C with trivial action. 2. If λ = (1, 1, ··· , 1) then every tableaux is row standard, and in bijection with the permutations by transposing the one-line notation. The left regular action of Sn on itself is preserved under this bijection, and we have M(1,1,··· ,1) ∼= CSn. 3. If λ = (n − 1, 1) then every row standard tableaux is identified uniquely by the number in row 2, which can be any of 1, 2, ··· , n. Figure 2.5 gives an example for the partition (3, 1). Define Ti to be the row standard tableaux with i in row 2. The action of w ∈ Sn on Ti is determined precisely by the image w(i). Therefore if we endow Cn with the natural permutation representation on an ordered basis t1, ··· , tn i.e., the representation of Sn as permutation matrices, then as representations of Sn we have M(n−1,1) ∼= Cn. 16 2 3 4 1 1 3 4 2 1 2 4 3 1 2 3 4 Figure 2.5: The row standard (3, 1) tableaux. Proposition 2.19. [24, Theorem 2.1.12] Let [T λ] be the row-equivalence class of T λ. The stabilizer subgroup Stab([T λ]) ∼= Sλ1 × Sλ2 × ··· × Sλn . Denote the product Sλ1 ×Sλ2 ×···×Sλn by Sλ and denote the trivial representation of Sλ by C1. Then Mλ is isomorphic to IndSn Sλ C1 as representations of Sn. 2.1.2.2 Irreducible representations: the Specht modules Given a tableau T define CT to be the subgroup of permutations that fix the entries in the columns of T. The CSn-module Mλ contains the elements eT = " w∈CT sgn(w)w · [T] where sgn(w)=(−1)$(w) is the sign of the permutation w ∈ Sn [24, Section 1.1]. Definition 2.20. The Specht module Sλ is the cyclic CSn-submodule of Mλ generated by eT λ . Example 2.21. Examples of Specht modules Sλ [24, Section 2.3]. 1. If λ = (n) then CT(n) is the trivial subgroup and eT(n) = [T(n) ]. Therefore S(n) = *[T(n) ]+C = M(n) affords the trivial representation (see Example 2.18). 17 2. If λ = (1, 1, ··· , 1) then CT(1,1,··· ,1) = Sn and therefore eT(1,1,··· ,1) = " w∈Sn sgn(w)w · [T(1,1,··· ,1)] is the signed sum of all the permutation of Sn when regarded as tableaux (see Example 2.18). The reader is encouraged to show if u ∈ Sn then u · eT(1,1,··· ,1) = sgn(u)eT(1,1,··· ,1) . Therefore S(1,1,··· ,1) is the sign representation. 3. If λ = (n − 1, 1) then using the notation of Example 2.18 we see that eT(n−1,1) = Tn − T1. It is not difficult to show the C-span of the vectors {w · eT(n−1,1)}w∈Sn is S(n−1,1) = {c1T1 + c2T2 ··· + cnTn : c1 + c2 ··· + cn = 0} . This is a (n − 1)-dimensional subspace of M(n−1,1) which we can choose a basis to be the set {Bi = Ti − Ti+1 : i = 1, 2, ··· n − 1} and with respect to this basis the action of the simple transposition sj ∈ Sn is sj · Bi =    Bi−1 + Bi if j = i − 1 −Bi if j = i Bi + Bi+1 if j = i + 1 Bi otherwise. The next theorem collects the main results of this theory. 18 Theorem 2.22. [24, Chapter 2] 1. The Specht modules Sλ for λ a partition of n are a complete list of nonisomorphic irreducible CSn-modules. 2. The dimension of Sλ is the number of standard tableaux of shape [λ]. For example, if n equals one of 1, 2, or 3 then Example 2.21 classifies up to isomorphism the irreducible complex representations of Sn. We need the following definition to prepare for our final result. Definition 2.23. Let λ, µ be partitions of n. A semistandard tableau T is a filling of [λ] with the numbers {1, 2, ··· , n} so that the entries are weakly increasing in rows and strictly increasing in columns. The content of T is c(T)=(c1, c2, ··· , cn) if T has ci entries equal i. The Kostka number Kλµ is the number of semistandard tableaux of shape [λ] and content µ. Figure 2.6 shows all the semistandard tableaux of shape [(2, 1)] together with their contents. It shows that K(2,1),(3) = 0 K(2,1),(2,1) = 1 and K(2,1),(1,1,1) = 2. T = 1 1 2 1 1 3 1 2 2 1 3 3 c(T) = (2, 1, 0) (2, 0, 1) (1, 2, 0) (1, 0, 2) T = 2 2 3 2 3 3 1 2 3 1 3 2 c(T) = (0, 2, 1) (0, 1, 2) (1, 1, 1) (1, 1, 1) Figure 2.6: The semistandard tableaux of shape [(2, 1)]. 19 As a last result we give a combinatorial description of the decomposition of Mµ in terms of the Specht modules Sλ. It foreshadows certain results we prove later. Theorem 2.24 (Young’s Rule). [24, Theorem 2.11.1] The multiplicity of Sλ in Mµ is the Kostka number Kλµ. In particular Mµ = ' λ KλµSλ. Further Kλλ = 1 and if Kλµ -= 0 then µ ! λ.